---
publication_date: 2025-07-21T17:13:00Z
slug: ethcc-2025
tags: [gnoland,event,post]
authors: michelleellen
---

# Gnomes at EthCC ‘25

Earlier this month, a couple of members of the Gno squad headed to EthCC in Cannes, France, to introduce the Ethereum community to Gno.land and share our take on Web7—a multi-user, language-based operating system for the programmable web.

## Gno.land in Action

Over a few packed days, we brought Gno.land to life with hands-on demos, live coding, and real conversations with devs at the booth. People got a sense of how Gno.land makes on-chain development feel natural.

One demo that caught attention showed how Gno contracts are written in a deterministic version of Go and published as clean, human-readable code, right on-chain.

One of the standout impressions was showing that the Gno.land homepage is itself a smart contract. It’s browsable, interactive, and fully rendered through Gnoweb, Gno.land’s universal browser layer. With the ‘Source’ and ‘Action’ tabs acting as both documentation and executable functions, the demo gave developers a real feel for the tech: backend logic, frontend interface, and program state, all unified on-chain, readable, and interactive.

## Feedback from the Community

The Ethereum crowd came with solid feedback and on-point questions, which is exactly what we were there for.

Developers welcomed the fact that Gno is Go-based, offering a gentler learning curve, more readable syntax, and a smoother onboarding experience compared to Solidity or Rust. Plenty of devs already use Go for real-world systems, and seeing it run smart contracts just made sense; it clicked quickly.

Gno.land’s source-level publishing model also stood out. The ability to write and publish human-readable contracts, rather than just bytecode, resonated with the open-source community. It enables transparency, composability, and author-level accountability. Developers could audit contracts on the spot at the booth and see the author attribution directly on-chain.

Visitors were also surprised by the breadth of the Gno.land platform. It’s not just another Layer 1, it's a full-stack application environment with its own language, virtual machine, runtime, and browser. The move toward a full operating system opens the door to a wide range of use cases beyond DeFi: coordination tools, publishing platforms, social networks, and general-purpose software, all with logic that’s on-chain, inspectable, and composable by default.

## That’s a Wrap

EthCC gave people a glimpse of what programmable infrastructure could feel like, and how Gno.land is building towards a new Web. Big thanks to everyone who stopped by the booth, asked questions, poked at the code, or just came for the swag. Extra props to the community gnomes who joined us in Cannes!
